Rollup Node Spec (#43)
ethereum-optimism/optimistic-specs: glossary.md

the log events emitted during the execution.

## EOA
[EOA]: /glossary.md#EOA

"Externally Owned Account", an Ethereum term to designate addresses operated by
users, as opposed to contract addresses.

## Merkle Root
[Merkle root]: /glossary.md#merkle-roots

The Merkle root is the root hash of a [Merkle Patricia tree] (MPT). A MPT is a
sparse [trie], which is a tree-like structure that maps keys to values. The root
hash of a MPT is a commitment to the contents of the tree, which allows a proof
to be constructed for any key-value mapping encoded in the tree. Such a proof is
called a Merkle proof, and can be verified against the Merkle root.

## Chain Re-Organization
[reorg]: /glossary.md#chain-re-organization

A re-organization, or re-org for short, is whenever the head of a blockchain
(its last block) changes (as dictated by the [fork choice rule]) to a block that
is not a child of the previous head.

L1 re-orgs can happen because of network conditions or attacks. L2 re-orgs are a
consequence of L1 re-orgs, mediated via [L2 chain derivation][derivation].

## Predeployed Contract ("Predeploy")
[predeploy]: /glossary.md#predeployed-contract-predeploy

> A contract that was deployed on-chain at genesis (i.e. at the start of the chain).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A contract placed in the L2 genesis state (i.e. at the start of the chain).
```

> Optimistic Ethereum has the following pre-compiles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimistic Ethereum has the following predeploys:
```

The L1 block number for which the first block of the L2 chain was generated.

## Rollup Node
[rollup node]: /glossary.md#rollup-node

The rollup node is responsible for [deriving the L2 chain][derivation] from the
[L2 derivation inputs][deriv-inputs] available on L1. This is done by its
[rollup driver] component.

- cf. [Rollup Node Specification](/rollup-node.md)

## Rollup Driver
[rollup driver]: /glossary.md#rollup-driver

The rollup driver is the [rollup node] component responsible for [deriving the
L2 chain][derivation] from the [L2 derivation inputs][deriv-inputs] available on
L1.

## L2 Chain Derivation
[derivation]:  /glossary.md#L2-chain-derivation

A process that reads [L2 derivation inputs][deriv-inputs] from L1 in order to
derive the L2 chain.

cf. [L2 Chain Derivation (in Rollup Node
Specification)](/rollup-node.md#l2-chain-derivation)

## L2 Derivation Inputs
[deriv-inputs]: /glossary.md#l2-chain-derivation-inputs

This term refers to data that is found in L1 blocks and is read by the [rollup
node] to construct [payload attributes].

Chain derivation attributes include:
- L1 block attributes
   - block number
   - timestamp
   - basefee

> - [deposits]

Reviewer: I would suggest either deleting these lines (which duplicate info on `rollup-node.md`) due to the confusion mentioned in the top-level comment, or putting something about feeds:

## Feed

This term refers to any array of data which is generated from L1 blocks by the [rollup node] in constructing [payload attributes] during block derivation.  Example feeds might be:
- a feed of L1 block attributes like `BASEFEE` and `TIMESTAMP` (computed from the L1 `blockHeader`)
- a feed of decoded deposit events (e.g. ABI decoded from events within the L1 `block.receiptsRoot`)

# Glossary

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# General Terms

## Layer 1 (L1)

> [L1]: /glossary.md#layer-1-L1

Author: My thinking was that with the absolute link, we could easily copy the links to any other place where we need them. It's a bit cute, no strong feeling about it. I've used relative anchors in the other file.

Refers the Ethereum blockchain, used used in contrast to [layer 2][L2], which
refers to Optimistic Ethereum.

## Layer 2 (L2)
[L2]: /glossary.md#layer-2-L2

Refers to the Optimistic Ethereum blockchain (specified in this repository),
used in contrast to [layer 1][L1], which refers to the Ethereum blockchain.

## Block
[block]: /glossary.md#layer-1-L1

Can refer to an [L1] block, or to an [L2] block, which are structured similarly.

A block is a sequential list of transactions, along with a couple of properties
stored in the *header* of the block. A description of these properties can be

> found in code comments [here][nano-header], or in the [Ethereum yellow paper

Author: It's a bit overkill since this is the glossary. The goal wasn't to be specificative necessarily but informative.
But you're right that there is the potential to fall behind, and it's confusing because, well this is a specification.

I'm not too sure what to do in this context. Listing everything like you say is not the goal here. I just wanted to give the reader a quick idea of what's in a header, and that seemed the easiest way to do it. Got any thoughts?

That being said, the problem of precise specification will be present in the execution engine spec. I'm thinking we shoud link to the yellow paper + the front page of the execution-specs repo that has the whole EIP list per hard fork, does that seem alright?

> found in code comments [here][nano-header], or in the [Ethereum yellow paper

Author: discussion here: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimistic-specs/issues/46

various [Merkle roots][Merkle root] for the L2 state and for log events emitted
during the execution.

## EOA
[EOA]: /glossary.md#EOA

"Externally Owned Account", an Ethereum term to designate addresses operated by
users, as opposed to contract addresses.

## Merkle Root
[Merkle root]: /glossary.md#merkle-roots

The Merkle root is the root hash of a [Merkle Patricia tree] (MPT). A MPT is a
[trie], which is a tree tree structure that maps keys to values. The root hash
of a MPT is a commitment to the contents of the tree, which allows a proof to be
constructed for any key-value mapping encoded in the tree. Such a proof is
called a Merkle proof, and can be verified against the Merkle root.

## Chain Re-Organization
[reorg]: /glossary.md#chain-re-organization

A re-organization, or re-org for short, is whenever the head of a blockchain
(its last block) changes (as dictated by the [fork choice rule]) to a block that
is not a child of the previous head.

L1 re-orgs can happen because of network conditions or attacks. L2 re-orgs are a
consequence of L1 re-orgs, mediated via [L2 chain derivation][derivation].

## Precompiled Contract ("Precompile")

> [precompile]: /glossary.md#precompiled-contract-precompile

Reviewer 2: Precompile vs predeploy? Does predeploy need to be specified as well?

Author: What's the trade-off between these two things? A pre-compile does necessitate a Geth transaction, but maybe it can be done very cleanly?

While we're at it, what do we expect the precompile/predeploys to be besides this L1 attributes oracle?

A contract that exists on chain but consumes no storage, and whose invocation
does not need to result in the execution of EVM bytecode. Instead, its behaviour
is defined by specification.

Ethereum L1 precompiles are specified in Appendix E of the [yellow
paper][yellow].

Optimistic Ethereum exposes all of Ethereum's precompiles, and adds the
following precompiles:

> - [L1 Attributes Precompiled Contract][l1-attr-precompile]

Author: cf. the comment that Mark made about this above

A few notes:
- a genesis contract is still part of the spec.
- a pre-deploy requires either a re-genesis or a hard fork. On the flip side, a precompile can retroactively exist since the start, since nobody called it before the new version of the spec. That being said, I suspect we might need a hard fork anyway.
- the L1 attributes are carried by a custom transaction type, which will require special handling.

I think the fact we'll need to modify Geth is a good argument against a precompile, especially since we'll need to store these L1 attributes somewhere (that's the real annoying thing, I figure precompiles can be added fairly easily).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# L2 Chain Concepts

## L2 Chain Inception
[L2 chain inception]: /glossary.md#L2-chain-inception

The L1 block number for which the first block of the L2 chain was generated.

## Rollup Node
[rollup node]: /glossary.md#rollup-node

The rollup node is responsible for [deriving the L2 chain][derivation] from the
[L2 derivation inputs][deriv-inputs] available on L1. This is done by its
[rollup driver] component.

The rollup node is also responsible for [block gossip], the process of
transmitting the L2 blocks it derives over a peer-to-peer network.

- cf. [Rollup Node Specification](/rollup-node.md)

> - cf. [Block Gossip Specification](TODO)

Author: Yeah, I was thinking to just drop the whole block gossip part since it doesn't serve any purpose at the deposit-only stage.

> **TODO LINK** block gossip spec

## Rollup Driver
[rollup driver]: /glossary.md#rollup-driver

The rollup driver is the [rollup node] component responsible for [deriving the
L2 chain][derivation] from the [L2 derivation inputs][deriv-inputs] available on
L1.

## L2 Chain Derivation
[derivation]:  /glossary.md#L2-chain-derivation

A process that reads [L2 derivation inputs][deriv-inputs] from L1 in order to
derive the L2 chain.

cf. [L2 Chain Derivation (in Rollup Node

> Specification)](/rollup-node.md#l2-chain-derivation)

Author: 80 lines baby! But yeah, we can do 100 or 120. Any thoughts?

And of course we can make tasteful exceptions.

> Specification)](/rollup-node.md#l2-chain-derivation)

Author: resolving this, followup here: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimistic-specs/pull/44

## L2 Derivation Inputs
[deriv-inputs]: /glossary.md#l2-chain-derivation-inputs

This term refers to data that is found in L1 blocks and is read by the [rollup
node] to construct [payload attributes].

Chain derivation attributes include:
- L1 block attributes
   - block number
   - timestamp

>    - basefee

Reviewer 2: Perhaps premature optimization, but I could imagine this also having the value of the `RANDOM` opcode post merge, see https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4399

Author: How does that relate to the `random` field we need to pass in the [payload attributes](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/blob/main/src/engine/specification.md#payloadattributesv1)?

Reading through, it seems to be the same:

> Beginning with TRANSITION_BLOCK, client software MUST set the value of the mixHash, i.e. the field with the number 13 (0-indexed) in a block header, to the output of the randomness beacon provided by the beacon chain.

That being said, that only means that it does not mean to be included in the special transaction to convey the attributes... it still needs to be read to construct the attributes, so it might be better to mention it here indeed.

If the `RANDOM` opcode become reality, we'll need to think about wether we want it to return something different on every block. In that case, it might be good to include randomness in the L1 attributes in the transaction, and change the `random` value in the payload attributes.

- [deposits]

## Payload Attributes
[payload attributes]: /glossary.md#payload-attributes

This term refers to data that can be derived from [L2 chain derivation
inputs][deriv-inputs] found on L1, which are then passed to the [execution
engine] to construct L2 blocks.

"Payload attributes" is a term that originates and is specified in the [Ethereum
Engine API specification][engine-api].

In addition to the [specified][engine-api] `timestamp`, `random`and
`suggestedFeeRecipient` fields, we add a field to specify the transactions that
the execution engine must include in the block and execute.

> > **TODO** The transaction field must be specified.

Reviewer 3: This is just the glossary, not the full specification. I would reference the engine API spec instead for the details.

Payload attributes were historically called "L2 block inputs" and you might
still hear some people using this term.

## L1 Attributes Transaction
[l1-attributes-tx]: /glossary.md#l1-attributes-transaction

A transaction with an Optimistic-Ethereum-specific transaction type, that is
used to register the L1 block attributes (number, timestamp, ...) on L2.

The L1 attributes for a given L1 block can be read on L2 from the [L1 Attributes

> Precompiled Contract][l1-attr-precompile].

Reviewer 3: I don't believe this precompile is the right approach. And although we can list it as a labeled transaction kind, I would say it's the same type of transaction as a deposit: some EVM execution authenticated by the rollup-node.

cf. [L1 attributes transaction format](/rollup-node.md#payload-transaction-format)
(in the section on [payload attributes])

> > **TODO** We might want to move this the format spec to the execution engine.

Reviewer 3: If it's just the same as the deposit-tx type, then we don't have to define a new type of transaction.

Author: I guess it depends how exactly deposits end up working (especially with regards to whether they include a signature). If they're signed, then it has to be different.

Author: Added a TODO that we might want to revisit this once the L1 deposit feed contract spec is up.

## L1 Attributes Precompiled Contract
[l1-attr-precompile]: /glossary.md#l1-attributes-precompiled-contract

A [precompiled contract][precompile] on L2 that can be used to retrieve the L1
block attributes of L1 blocks with a given block number or a given block hash.

cf. [L1 Attributes Precompiled Contract Specification](TODO)

> > **TODO LINK** L1 attributes precompiled contract spec

Reviewer 3: It looks like a precompile, but we don't need it to be one, and I would prefer not to change geth when we do not have to. In this case we want upgradeability, storage, and updates through transactions. Reusing the EVM smart contracts, state storage, and deposit transactions covers everything we need. No need for a precompile.

Author: For the sake of brevity and concentrating the discourse, could we avoid making the same comment in three different places ;)

A contract to which [EOAs][EOA] and contracts may send [deposits]. The deposits
are emitted as log records (in Solidity, these are called *events*) for
consumption by [rollup nodes][rollup node].

Advanced note: the deposits are not stored in calldata because they can be send
by contracts, in which case the calldata is part of the execution, but its value
is not captured in one of the [Merkle roots][Merkle root] included in the L1
block.

cf. [L2 Deposit Feed Contract Specification](TODO)

> **TODO LINK** deposit feed contract specification

## Block Gossip
[block gossip]: /glossary.md#block-gossip

Block gossip is a [rollup node] component responsible for transmitting the L2
blocks derived by the rollup node over a peer-to-peer network.

> Note that block gossip is not useful in the current deposit-only model, but
> will become useful in later stages of the specification process.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Execution Engine Concepts

## Execution Engine
[execution engine]: /glossary.md#execution-engine

The execution engine is responsible for executing transactions in blocks and

> computing the resulting state roots, log roots and block hash.

Reviewer 3: There is no such thing as a "log root". The logs are part of the receipt (encoded in RLP etc.), but not merkleized or hashed individually. The receipts form a MPT. They are combined into a bloom filter though.

Author: You're right, "receipts root" is really what is meant here.
